= A Tour of the NTP Internals =

This document is intended to be helpful to people trying to understand
and modify the NTP code.  It aims to explain how the pieces fit
together. It also explains some oddities that are more understandable
if you know more about the history of this (rather old) codebase.

If you learn a piece of the code well enough to do so, please add
to this document.  Having tricks and traps that impeded understanding
explained here is especially valuable.

However, try not to replicate comments here; it's better to point
at where they live in the code.  This document is intended to convey
a higher-level view than individual comments.

== Key Types ==

=== l_fp, s_fp, u_fp ===

C doesn't have any native fixed-point types, only float types.
To do certain time calculations without loss of precision, NTP
home-brews three fixed-point types of its own.  Of these, l_fp is the
most common, with 32 bits of precision in both integer and fractional
parts. Gory details are in include/ntp_fp.h.

One point not covered there is that an l_fp is actually a symmetrical
truncation of the full NTP date (for which no data type exists) about
the fixed point location.  The full NTP date has 64 bits for both the
integer and fractional part, which get truncated to the right 32bit
for the fractional and the left 32bit for the fractional part to
become an l_fp.  For most calculations with l_fp it's easier to
envision it as a 64bit integer that represents time with a unit of
2^-32s, slightly short of 233 ps.

When used to represent dates internally an l_fp must be interpreted
relative to the NTP era (the left 32 bits of the integer part of the
NTP date that got cut off).  The NTP prime epoch (or epoch 0) is then
an *unsigned* number of seconds since 1900-01-01T00:00:00Z and
unsigned decimal fractional seconds, just to complicate matters.
However, some uses of l_fp are time offsets with a signed seconds
part.  Under the assumption that only adjacent epochs get compared,
the offset calculations work correctly without taking the era number
into account.

Most time offsets are much smaller than the NTP epoch, so a 32-bit
representation is used for these. There were two of these:
s_fp for signed offsets and u_fp for strictly non-negative ones.
NTPsec has already removed the singed version

The comments in libntp/ntp_calendar.c are pretty illuminating about
calendar representations.  A high-level point they don't make is
that ignoring time cycles in l_fp is how NTP gets around the
Y2K38 problem. As long as the average clock skew between machines
is much less than the length of a calendar cycle (which it generally
will be, by a factor of at least five million) we can map all incoming
timestamps from whatever cycle into the nearest time in modular
arithmetic relative to the cycle length.

=== time64_t ===

NTP was written well before the 64-bit word size became common. While
compilers on 32-bit machines sometimes have had "long long" as an
integral 64-bit type, this was not guaranteed before C99.

Thus to do calendar arithmetic, NTP used to carry a "vint64"
(variant 64-bit int) type that was actually a union with several
different interpretations; the scalar time64_t which is used the same
way but implemented as a uint64_t has already replaced this.

This still has some utility because NTP still runs on 32-bit machines
with a 32-bit time_t.

=== refid ===

A refid is not a type of its own, but a convention that overloads
different kinds of information in a 32-bit field that occurs in a
couple of different places internally.

In a clock sample (a time-sync packet with stratum number 1), the
refid is interpreted as 4 ASCII characters of clock identification.
In a time-synchronization packet with stratum 2 or higher the refid
identifies the originating time server; it may be an IPv4 or a hash of
an IPv6 address.  (If and when the protocol is redesigned for
IPv6 the field length will go to 128 bits and it will become a full
IPv6 address.)

Internally the refid is used for loop detection. (Which is why hashing
IPv6 addresses is risky - hash collisions happen.) It's also part of
ntpq's display in the status line for a reference clock, if you have
one locally attached.

The driver structure for reference clocks has a refid field that is
(by default) copied into samples issued from that clock. It is
not necessarily unique to a driver type; notably, all GPS driver
types ship the refid "GPS". It is possible to fudge this ID to
something more informative in the ntpd configuration command
for the driver.

The conflation of ID-for-humans with the loop-detection cookie is not quite
the design error it looks like, as refclocks aren't implicated in
loop detection.

=== struct timespec vs. struct timeval ===

These aren't local types themselves - both are standardized in
ANSI/POSIX.  They're both second/subsecond pairs intended to represent
time without loss of precision due to float operations.  The
difference is that a timespec represents nanoseconds, while a timeval
represents only microseconds.

Historically, struct timeval is associated with the minicomputer-based
Berkeley Unixes of the 1980s, designed when processor clocks were
several orders of magnitude slower than they became after the turn of
the millennium.  The struct timespec is newer and associated with
ANSI/POSIX standardization.

The NTP code was written well before calls like clock_gettime(2) that
use it were standardized, but as part of its general cleanup NTPsec
has been updated to do all its internal computations at nanosecond
precision or better.

Thus, when you see a struct timeval in the NTPsec code, it's due to
a precision limit imposed by an external interface.  One such is in
the code for using the old BSD adjtime(2) call; another is in getting
packet timestamps from the IP layer.  Our practice is to convert from
or to nanosecond precision as close to these call sites as possible;
this doesn't pull additional accuracy out of thin air, but it does
avoid loss-of-precision bugs due to mixing these structures.

=== struct peer ===

In ntpd, there are peer control blocks - one per upstream synchronization
source - that have an IP address in them.  That's what the main
control logic works with.

The peer buffer holds the last eight samples from the upstream source.
The normal logic uses the one with the lowest round-trip time.  That's
a hack to minimize errors from queuing delays out on the big bad
internet.  Refclock data always has a round trip time of zero, and the
code that finds the lowest RTT picks the most recent slot when the
RTTs are equal.

== config file parser ==

There is a minor quirk: numbers come in as integers, type T_Integer.
There is no type T_Unsigned.  Range checking may not work right.

== ntpd control flow ==

In normal operation, after initialization, ntpd loops forever
waiting for a UDP packet to arrive on some set of open interfaces, or
a clock sample to arrive from a locally-attached reference clock.
Incoming packets and clock samples are fed to a protocol state
machine, which may generate UDP sends to peers.  This main loop is
captured by a function in ntpd/ntpd.c tellingly named 'mainloop()'.

This main loop is interrupted once per second by a timer tick that
sets an alarm flag visible to the mainloop() logic.  When execution
gets back around to where that flag is checked, a timer() function may
fire; this is used to adjust the system clock in time and frequency,
implement the kiss-o'-death function and the association polling
function.

There may be one asynchronous thread.  It does DNS lookups of server
and pool hostnames; this is intended to avoid adding startup delay
and jitter to the time synchronization logic due to address lookups
of unpredictable length.

Input handling used to be a lot more complex.  Due to inability to get
arrival timestamps from the host's UDP layer, the code used to do
asynchronous I/O with packet I/O indicated by a signal, with packets
(and their arrival timestamps) being stashed in a ring of buffers that
was consumed by the main protocol loop.  Some of this code hasn't been
cleaned up yet.

This looked partly like a performance hack, but if so it was an
ineffective one. Because there is necessarily a synchronous bottleneck
at protocol handling, packets arriving faster than the main loop could
cycle would pile up in the ring buffer and latecomers would be
dropped.

(Also, it turns out not to be important at post-Y2K machine speeds to
get those arrival timestamps from the UDP layer ASAP, rather than
looking at packet read time in userspace. The cost of the latter,
naive approach is additional jitter dominated by process-scheduling
time; this used to be significant relative to users' accuracy
expectations for NTP, but scheduler timeslices have since decreased
by orders of magnitude and squashed the issue. We know this from some
tests setup having run for six months with packet-timestamp fetching
accidentally disabled...  But they weren't busy systems.)

The new organization stops pretending; it simply spins on a select
across all interfaces.  If inbound traffic is more than the daemon can
handle, packets will pile up in the UDP layer and be dropped at that
level. The main difference is that dropped packets are less likely to
be visible in the statistics the server can gather. (To show,
they'd have to make it out of the system IP layer to userland at a
higher rate than ntpd can process; this is very unlikely.)

There was internal evidence in the NTP Classic build machinery that
asynchronous I/O on Unix machines probably hadn't worked for
quite a while before NTPsec removed it.

== System call interface and the PLL ==

All of ntpds clock management is done through four system calls:
clock_gettime(2), clock_settime(2), and either ntp_adjtime(2) or (in
exceptional cases) the older BSD adjtime(2) call.  For ntp_adjtime(),
ntpd uses a thin wrapper that hides the difference between
systems with nanosecond-precision and those with only microsecond
precision; internally, ntpd does all its calculations with nanosecond
precision.

The clock_gettime(2) and clock_settime(2) calls are standardized in
POSIX; ntp_adjtime(2) is not, exhibiting some variability in
behavior across platforms (in particular as to whether it supports
nanosecond or microsecond precision).

Where adjtimex(2) exists (notably under Linux), both ntp_adjtime()
and adjtime() are implemented as library wrappers around it.  The
need to implement adjtime() is why the Linux version of struct timex
has a (non-portable) 'time' member;

There is some confusion abroad about this interface because it has
left a trail of abandoned experiments behind it.

Older BSD systems read the clock using gettimeofday(2)
(in POSIX but deprecated) and set it using settimeofday(2),
which was never standardized. Neither of these calls are still
used in NTPsec, though the equally ancient BSD adjtime(2) call
is, on systems without kernel PLL support.

Also, glibc (and possibly other C libraries) implement two other
related calls, ntp_gettime(3) and ntp_gettimex(3). These are not used
by the NTP suite itself (except that the ntptime test program attempts
to exercise ntp_gettime(3)), but rather are intended for time-using
applications that also want an estimate of clock error and the
leap-second offset.  Neither has been standardized by POSIX, and they
have not achieved wide use in applications.

Both ntp_gettime(3) and ntp_gettimex(3) can be implemented as wrappers
around ntp_adjtime(2)/adjtimex(2).  Thus, on a Linux system, the
library ntp_gettime(3) call could conceivably go through two levels
of indirection, being implemented in terms of ntp_adjtime(2) which
is in turn implemented by adjtimex(2).

Unhelpfully, the non-POSIX calls in the above assortment are very
poorly documented.

The roles of clock_gettime(2) and clock_settime(2) are simple.
They're used for reading and setting ("stepping", in NTP jargon) the
system clock.  Stepping is avoided whenever possible because it
introduces discontinuities that may confuse applications.  Stepping is
usually done only at ntpd startup (which is typically at boot time)
and only when the skew between system and NTP time is relatively
large.

The sync algorithm prefers slewing to stepping.  Slewing speeds up or
slows down the clock by a very small amount that will, after a
relatively short time, sync the clock to NTP time.  The advantage of
this method is that it doesn't introduce discontinuities that
applications might notice. The slewing variations in clock speed are so
small that they're generally invisible even to soft-realtime
applications.

The call ntp_adjtime(2) is for clock slewing; NTPsec never calls
adjtimex(2) directly, but it may be used to implement
ntp_adjtime(2). ntp_adjtime(2)/adjtimex(2) uses a kernel interface to
do its work, using a control technique called a PLL/FLL (phase-locked
loop/frequency-locked loop) to do it.

The older BSD adjtime(2) can be used for slewing as well but doesn't
assume a kernel-level PLL is available.  It is used when
ntp_adjtime() calls generate a SIGSYS because the system call has not
been implemented.  Without the PLL calls, convergence to a good time is
observably a lot slower, and tracking will accordingly be less
reliable; support for systems that lack them (notably OpenBSD and
older Mac OS X versions) has been dropped from NTPsec.

Deep-in-the weeds details about the kernel PLL from Hal Murray follow.
If you can follow these, you may be qualified to maintain this code.

Deep inside the kernel, there is code that updates the time by reading the
cycle counter, subtracting off the previous cycle count and multiplying by
the time/cycle.  The actual implementation is complicated mostly to maintain
accuracy.  You need ballpark of 9 digits of accuracy on the time/cycle, and
that has to get carried through the calculations.

On PCs, Linux measures the time/cycle at boot time by comparing with another
clock with a known frequency.  If you are building for a specific hardware
platform, you could compile it in as a constant.
You see things like this in syslog:

-----------------------------------------------------------
tsc: Refined TSC clocksource calibration: 1993.548 MHz
-----------------------------------------------------------

You can grep for "MHz" to find these.

(Side note.  1993 MHz is probably 2000 MHz rounded down slightly by
the clock fuzzing to smear the EMI over a broader band to comply with
FCC rules.  It rounds down to make sure the CPU isn't overclocked.)

There is an API call to adjust the time/cycle.  That adjustment is ntpds
drift.  That covers manufacturing errors and temperature changes and such.
The manufacturing error part is typically under 50 PPM.  I have a few systems
off by over 100.  The temperature part varies by ballpark of 1 PPM / C.

There is another error source which is errors in the calibration code and
timekeeping code.  If your timekeeping code rounds down occasionally, you
can correct for that by tweaking the time/cycle.

There is another API that says "slew the clock by X seconds".  That is
implemented by tweaking the time/cycle slightly, waiting until the correct
adjustment has happened, then restoring the correct time/cycle.  The "slight"
is 500 PPM.  It takes a long time to make major corrections.

That slewing has nothing (directly) to do with a PLL.  It could be
implemented in user code with reduced accuracy.

There is a PLL kernel option to track a PPS.  It's not compiled into most
Linux kernels.  (It doesn't work with tickless.)  There is an API to turn it
on.  Then ntpd sits off to the side and watches.

RFC 1589 covers the above timekeeping and slewing and kernel PLL.

RFC 2783 covers the API for reading a time stamp the kernel grabs when a PPS
happens.

== Refclock management ==

There is an illuminating comment in ntpd/ntp_refclock.c that begins
"Reference clock support is provided here by maintaining the fiction
that the clock is actually a peer."  The code mostly hides the
difference between clock samples and sync updates from peers.

Internally, each refclock has a FIFO holding the last ~64 samples.  For
things like NMEA, each time the driver, gets a valid sample it adds it to the
FIFO.  For the Atom/PPS driver there is a hook that gets called/polled each
second.  If it finds good data, it adds a sample to the FIFO.  The FIFO is
a ring buffer.  On overflow, old samples are dropped.

At the polling interval, the driver is "polled".  (Note the possible
confusion on "poll".)  That is parallel with sending a packet to the
device, if required - some have to be polled.  The driver can call
back and say "process everything in the FIFO", or do something or set
a flag and call back later.

The process everything step sorts the contents of the FIFO, then discards
outliers, roughly 1/3 of the samples, and then figures out the average and
injects that into the peer buffer for the refclock.

== Asynchronous DNS lookup ==

The DNS code runs in a separate thread to avoid stalling
the main loop while it waits for a DNS lookup to return. And DNS
lookups can take a *long* time.  Hal Murray notes that
he thinks he's seen 40 seconds on a failing case.

The old async-DNS support seemed somewhat overengineered.  Whoever
built it was thinking in terms of a general async-worker facility
and implemented things that this use of it probably doesn't
need - notably an input-buffer pool.  (It also had an obscure bug.)

The DNS lookups during initialization - of hostnames specified on the
command line or server lines in ntp.conf - could be done synchronously.

But that would delay startup, and there are two cases we know of where
ntpd has to do a DNS lookup during normal operation.

One is the try again when DNS for the normal server case doesn't work during
initialization.  It will try again occasionally until it gets an answer.
(which might be negative)

The main one is the pool code trying for more servers.  There are two
cases for that.  One is that the initial result didn't return as many
addresses as desired.  The other is when pool servers die and need to
be replaced with working ones.

There are several possible extensions in this area.  The main one would
be to verify that a server you are using is still in the pool.  (There
isn't a way to do that yet - the pool doesn't have any DNS support
for it.)  The other would be to try replacing the poorest server
rather than only replacing dead servers.

== The build recipe ==

The build recipe is, essentially, a big Python program using a set of
specialized procedures called 'waf'.  To learn about waf itself see
the https://waf.io/book/[Waf Book]; this section is about the
organization and particular quirks of NTPsec's build.

If you are used to autoconf, you will find the waf recipe
odd at first.  We replaced autoconf because with waf the
build recipe is orders of magnitude less complex,
faster, and more maintainable.

The top-level wscript calls wscript files in various subdirectories
using the ctx.recurse() function. These subfiles are all relatively
simple, consisting mainly of calls to the waf function ctx().  Each
such call declares a build target to be composed (often using the
compiler) from various prerequisites.

The top-level wscript does not itself declare a lot of targets (the
exceptions are a handful of installable shell scripts and man pages).
It is mainly concerned with setting up various assumptions for the
configure and build phases.

If you are used to working with Makefiles, you may find the absence
of object files and binaries from the source directory after a build
surprising.  Look under the build/ directory.

Most of the complexity in this build is in the configure phase when
the build engine is probing the environment.  The product of this
phase is the file build/config.h, which the C programs include to
get symbols that describe the environment's capabilities and
quirks.

The configuration logic consists of a largish number of Python files
in the wafhelpers/ directory. The entire collection is structured as
a loadable Python module.  Here are a few useful generalizations:

* The main sequence of the configuration logic, and most of the simpler
  checks live in configure.py.

* Some generic but bulky helper functions live in probes.py.

* The check_*.py files isolate checks for individual capabilities;
  you can generally figure out which ones by looking at the name.

* If you need to add a build or configure option, look in options.py.
  You will usually be able to model your implementation on code that
  is already there.

== The Python tools ==

Project policy is that (a) anything that does not have to be written
in C shouldn't be, and (b) our preferred non-C language is Python.
Most of the auxiliary tools have already been moved.  This section
describes how they fit together.

== The pylib/ntp library

The most important structural thing about the python tools is the
layering of the three most important ones - ntpq, ntpdig, and ntpmon.
These are front ends to a back-end library of Python service routines that
installs as 'ntp' and lives in the source tree at pylib/.

=== ntpq and ntpmon ===

ntpq and ntpmon are front ends to back-end class called ControlSession
that lives in ntp.packet.

ntpq proper is mostly one big instance of a class derived from
Python's cmd.Cmd. That command interpreter, the Ntpq class, manages an
instance of a back-end ControlSession class.  ControlSession speaks
the Mode 6 control protocol recognized by the daemon.

The cmd.Cmd methods are mostly pretty thin
wrappers around calls to eight methods of ControlSession
corresponding to each of the implemented Mode 6 request types.

Within ControlSession, those methods turn into wrappers around
doquery() calls.  doquery() encapsulates "send a request, get a
response" and includes all the response fragment reassembly, retry,
and time-out/panic logic.

ntpmon is simpler.  It's a basic TUI modeled on Unix top(1), mutt(1)
and similar programs.  It just calls some of the ControlSession
methods repeatedly, formatting what it gets back as a live display.

The code for making the actual displays in ntpq and ntpmon mostly
doesn't live in the front end.  It's in ntp.util, well separated from
both the command interpreter and the protocol back end so it can be
re-used.

=== ntpdig ===

ntpdig also uses the pylib library but doesn't speak Mode 6.
Instead, it builds and interprets time-synchronization packets
using some of the same machinery.

=== MRU reporting ===

The mrulist() method in ControlSession is more complex than the rest of the
back-end code put together except do_query() itself.  It is the one part
that was genuinely difficult to write, as opposed to merely having high
friction because the C it was translated from was so grotty.

The way that part of the protocol works is a loop that does two
layers of segment reassembly.  The lower layer is the vanilla UDP
fragment reassembly encapsulated in do_query() and shared with the
other request types.

To avoid blocking for long periods of time, and to
be cleanly interruptible by control-C, the upper layer does a sequence
of requests for MRU spans, which are multi-frag sequences of
ASCIIizations of MRU records, oldest to newest.  The spans include
sequence metadata intended to allow you to stitch them together on the
fly in O(n) time.

Note that the data for a slot will be returned more than once if a
request arrives after the data was returned but before the collection
has finished.

The code collects all the data, maybe sorts it, then prints it out.

There is also a direct mode that prints the individual slots
as they come in; this avoids needing lots of memory if you want
to get the MRU data from a system that keeps lots of history.

A further interesting complication is the use of a nonce to foil DDoSes by
source-address spoofing.  The mrulist() code begins by requesting a
nonce from ntpd, which it then replays between span requests to
convince ntpd that the address it's firehosing all that MRU data at is
the same one that asked for the nonce. To foil replay attacks, the
nonce is timed out; you have to re-request another every 16 seconds
(the code does this automatically).

The Python code does not replicate the old C logic for stitching
together the MRU spans; that looked pretty fragile in the presence of
span dropouts (we don't know that those can ever happen, but we don't
know that they can't, either).  Instead, it just brute-forces the problem
- accumulates all the MRU spans until either the protocol marker for
the end of the last one or ^C interrupting the span-read loop, and
then quicksorts the list before handing it up to the front end for
display.

There's a keyboard-interrupt catcher *inside* the mrulist() method.
That feels like a layering violation, but nobody has come up with a
better way to partition things.  Under the given constraints there may
not be one.

// end
